Add Blazor WASM telemetry docs and post-deployment observability guidance (#455)
microsoft/aspire.dev: src/frontend/src/content/docs/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry/blazor-webassembly.mdx

Reviewer: @alistairmatthews I apologize. I took another look and I think we might need to rethink this.

In WebAssembly we are enabling the .NET OTEL telemetry SDK as part of other changes. I started looking at this from the general point of Blazor (the js bit is still useful for blazor with enhanced nav) and thinking that the OTEL telemetry on JS will add additional information, but after looking at it in more detail, I think it's mostly going to do the same thing as https://github.com/microsoft/aspire/pull/15691 which is the "blessed" approach for .NET and would end up causing issues (essentially duplicating logs and traces).

Based on that, I think we might want to rework the approach here. I apologies, I should have realized earlier.

Reviewer 2: @javiercn No problem! Is there some sample code you could point me towards that shows how to do it without that duplication?

---
title: Blazor WebAssembly integration

> description: Enable browser telemetry for Blazor WebAssembly apps with Aspire 13.4 Blazor hosting, gateway proxying, and client service defaults.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Enable browser telemetry for Blazor WebAssembly apps with Aspire's Blazor hosting, gateway proxying, and client service defaults.
```

> description: Enable browser telemetry for Blazor WebAssembly apps with Aspire 13.4 Blazor hosting, gateway proxying, and client service defaults.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: Enable browser telemetry for Blazor WebAssembly apps with Aspire's Blazor hosting, gateway proxying, and client service defaults.
```

---

import { Tabs, TabItem } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> Blazor WebAssembly apps run .NET in the browser, so they need a startup path that makes telemetry configuration available before the WebAssembly runtime starts. In Aspire 13.4, use the Aspire Blazor hosting integration instead of configuring a Blazor WebAssembly app like a generic JavaScript browser app that sends OTLP directly to the dashboard.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Blazor WebAssembly apps run .NET in the browser, so they need a startup path that makes telemetry configuration available before the WebAssembly runtime starts. Starting with Aspire 13.4, you can use the Aspire Blazor hosting integration instead of configuring a Blazor WebAssembly app like a generic JavaScript browser app that sends OTLP directly to the dashboard.
```

The Blazor hosting integration configures same-origin gateway or host routes for service calls and OTLP telemetry. The browser sends telemetry to a relative `/_otlp` path, or the app-prefixed equivalent such as `/app/_otlp`, and the gateway or host forwards it to the Aspire dashboard. This avoids CORS setup for the dashboard and keeps dashboard OTLP headers on the server-side proxy instead of putting them in browser-visible configuration.

## Configure standalone Blazor WebAssembly

For a standalone Blazor WebAssembly project, add the WASM project resource, reference any backend services from it, and bind it to a Blazor Gateway. Configure the gateway with HTTP/protobuf OTLP export because browser-based clients can't use OTLP/gRPC.

<Tabs syncKey='aspire-lang'>
<TabItem id='csharp' label='C#'>

```csharp title="AppHost.cs"
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

var weatherApi = builder.AddProject<Projects.WeatherApi>("weatherapi");

> var blazorApp = builder.AddBlazorWasmProject("app", "../Client/Client.csproj")

Reviewer 4: This C# form won't compile. In C#, `AddBlazorWasmProject` is generic and takes only a name — the project path comes from the `Projects.*` metadata type:

```csharp
var blazorApp = builder.AddBlazorWasmProject<Projects.Client>("app")
    .WithReference(weatherApi);
```

The `(name, projectPath)` string overload does exist, but in C# it's named `AddBlazorWasmApp`, not `AddBlazorWasmProject` (see `src/Aspire.Hosting.Blazor/BlazorGatewayExtensions.cs`; the playground uses `AddBlazorWasmProject<Projects.BlazorStandalone>("app")`).

The TypeScript tab below is fine as written — `addBlazorWasmProject('app', '../Client/Client.csproj')` is the correct TS capability (the C# `AddBlazorWasmApp` is exported to TS as `addBlazorWasmProject`). So only the C# tab needs the fix.

Reviewer 2: Correct. Fixed in #1367

---
title: Blazor WebAssembly integration
description: Learn how to integrate browser telemetry in a Blazor WebAssembly app using JavaScript interop.
---

import LearnMore from '@components/LearnMore.astro';
import { Aside } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> Blazor WebAssembly (WASM) apps run entirely in the browser using a .NET runtime compiled to WebAssembly. Like other browser apps, Blazor WASM apps use the [JavaScript OTEL SDK](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/languages/js/getting-started/browser/) to send telemetry to the Aspire dashboard via JavaScript interop. The dashboard configuration for [OTLP HTTP](/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry/#otlp-configuration) and [CORS](/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry/#cors-configuration) described in [Enable browser telemetry](/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry/) applies to Blazor WASM apps as well.

Reviewer: Technically Yes, but actually not. The reason for it is that our recommended design/implementation approach, strongly recommends using a proxy to avoid having to deal with CORS and to have the possibility of intercepting and filtering the telemetry.

## Provide OTEL configuration to the browser

Blazor WASM apps can't read server-side environment variables directly. When the app is hosted by an ASP.NET Core server (for example, a Blazor Web App or hosted Blazor WASM project), expose the OTEL configuration through an API endpoint on the server:

```csharp title="C# — Program.cs (Server)"
using Microsoft.AspNetCore.Authorization;

app.MapGet("/api/telemetry-config", [Authorize] (IConfiguration config) => new
{
    Endpoint = config.GetValue<string>("OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT", ""),
    Headers = config.GetValue<string>("OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS", ""),
    ResourceAttributes = config.GetValue<string>("OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES", "")
});
```

<Aside type="caution">
This approach exposes the OTLP API key to the browser in the HTTP response. For environments where the API key must remain secret, use an [authenticated OTEL proxy](#authenticated-otel-proxy) instead. In production, consider adding authentication or authorization to restrict access to this endpoint.

> </Aside>

Reviewer: This is the other reason where we simply discarded this approach. No sharing of secrets to the client.

## Initialize OTEL from a Blazor component

In the Blazor WASM app, call the JavaScript `initializeTelemetry` function using `IJSRuntime` after the component has rendered. Add the [JavaScript OTEL SDK initialization code](/dashboard/enable-browser-telemetry/browser-app-configuration/#example-browser-telemetry-code) to a JavaScript file bundled with your app, then call it from a Razor component:

```razor title="Razor — TelemetryInitializer.razor (Client)"
@inject IJSRuntime JS
@inject HttpClient Http

@code {
    protected override async Task OnAfterRenderAsync(bool firstRender)
    {
        if (firstRender)
        {
            var config = await Http.GetFromJsonAsync<TelemetryConfig>("/api/telemetry-config");
            if (config is { Endpoint.Length: > 0 })
            {
                await JS.InvokeVoidAsync(
                    "initializeTelemetry",
                    config.Endpoint,
                    config.Headers,
                    config.ResourceAttributes);
            }
        }
    }

    private sealed record TelemetryConfig(
        string Endpoint,
        string Headers,
        string ResourceAttributes);
}
```

> Include this component in your `App.razor` or another top-level component so that telemetry is initialized when the app loads.

Reviewer: This is much better done with a JS initializer, which already runs before Blazor starts and has direct access to JS, and can set "environment variables" on the runtime so that it works like any other .NET project.
